# Structs as Data Models

In this problem, it will be convenient to model each elf in code. Generally, there are too tools for data modelling in rust: `struct`'s and `enum`'s. `enum`'s are for data that have explicit, countable (_enumerated_) variants. We don't have any elf variants, so we don't need any `enum`'s. Instead, we create an `Elf` struct. We'll also create an empty main function (rustc will complain if our binaries don't have a `main`)

```rust
/* aoc/day_1/src/main.rs */
struct Elf;

fn main() {}
```

Elves have a single set of data that we need to model: `calories`, which is a list of the Calorie counts of all the food items the elf is carrying. We should use a `Vec` to store these Calorie counts, since we don't know how many food items each elf is carrying. We add that data member to our elf struct.

```rust
/* aoc/day_1/src/main.rs */
struct Elf {
    calories: Vec<u32>,
}

// ..
```

We will also need to compare elves against each other to see who is holding the most calories, so we create a `Vec` of `Elf`'s and call it an expedition. We could simply add the line `let expedition: Vec<Elf> = vec![];` to our main function. However, much of Rust's appeal comes from its powerful type system, so we create a type wrapper for the expedition instead. 

```rust
/* aoc/day_1/src/main.rs */
struct Expedition(Vec<Elf>);    // NEW

struct Elf {
    calories: Vec<u32>,
}

// ..
```

> Notice that our `Expedition` is a _tuple struct_, meaning it has no named variables. This struct is initialized with parentheses instead of brackets. 

## Test-driven data parsing

I think these two structs are enough to model our data for now. Let's work on loading our data into this system. We define an `impl` block under our `Elf` struct.

```rust
/* aoc/day_1/src/main.rs */
// ..
struct Elf {
    calories: Vec<u32>,
}

impl Elf {
    fn new() -> Self {
        todo!()
    }

    fn add_calorie(&mut self, calorie: u32) {
        todo!{}
    }
}

// ..
```

I've provided signatures for two functions that we'll use for this challenge. `new` returns a new `Elf` with an empty `calories` vector. `add_calorie`. `add_calorie` pushes a new integer onto the elf's `calorie` vector. If you're feeling confident, you're welcome to fill out the bodies of these functions yourself. However, before we go there, let's set up some unit tests to make sure we understand what we want our functions to do. We create a _test module_ at the bottom of the page.

```rust
/* aoc/day_1/src/main.rs */
// ..

#[cfg(test)]
mod day_1 {
    use super::*;

    #[test]
    fn test_new_elf() {
        todo!()
    }

    #[test]
    fn test_add_calorie() {
        todo!()
    }
}
```

> In this module, `#[cfg(...)]` instructs rustc to compile only if certain conditions are met--in this case, if the `cargo test` is run. The `#[test]` attributes tells rustc that the proceeding functions are tests, and should be treated as such during cargo's test run.
> `use super::*;` allows us to use the code defined in the parent module. 

We add bodies to these test functions, using the `assert!` macro suite to check if our code's output matches what we expect. We can include as many `assert!` statements as we wish.

```rust
/* aoc/day_1/src/main.rs */
// ..

#[cfg(test)]
mod day_1 {
    use super::*;

    #[test]
    fn test_new_elf() {
        let elf = Elf::new();
        assert_eq!(elf.calories.len(), 0);
    }

    #[test]
    fn test_add_calorie() {
        let mut elf = Elf::new();
        elf.add_calorie(1);
        elf.add_calorie(2);
        elf.add_calorie(3);
        assert_eq!(elf.calories, vec![1, 2, 3]);
    }
}
```

Let's check our test output. We expect our tests to fail, but that's okay for now. (Output has been shortened for brevity).

```bash
# aoc/day_1/
$ cargo test day_1
running 2 tests
test day_1::test_new_elf ... FAILED
test day_1::test_add_calorie ... FAILED
```

It looks like compilation worked, so let's start filling in those two `Elf` implementations we defined earlier. 

```rust
/* aoc/day_1/src/main.rs */
// ..

impl Elf {
    fn new() -> Self {
        Self { calories: vec![] }
    }

    fn add_calorie(&mut self, calorie: u32) {
        self.calories.push(calorie);
    }
}

// ..
```

This code should do it, but let's make sure that everything is working correctly.

```bash
$ cargo test day_1
running 2 tests
test day_1::test_new_elf ... ok
test day_1::test_add_calorie ... ok
```

Looks good! 

## The `Default` trait

Our code works fine. However, there is a slightly easier way to define that `new` function, which will be beneficial to any programmers using our code. The standard library includes the `Default` trait. This trait defines a function, `default`, that returns `Self` with members set to sensible default. These default values can be determined by the developer, though in simple cases such as ours, it makes more sense to simply let the compiler derive sensible defaults. I will first show what an explicit `Default` implementation for `Elf` would look like, then we will build a simpler method using a `#[derive(...)]` attribute.

```rust
/* aoc/day_1/src/main.rs */
// ..

// This implementation offers no advantage over a simple #[derive(Default)] attribute.
impl Default for Elf {
    fn default() -> Self {
        Self {
            calories: Default::default(),
        }
    }
}

// ..
```

The above implementation offers us a new function, `Elf::default`, which can be used in our `new` function, among other places.

Notice the `calories: Default::default()` line in the middle. The standard library already implements `Default` for `u32` and `Vec<...>`, meaning the compiler can infer the meaning of `Vec<u32>::default()`. In this case, the compiler will initialize a vector of zero length. In general, the compiler can derive the default of any struct composed of members that implement the `Default` trait. Let's tell the compiler to do this for our `Elf` struct. 

```rust
/* aoc/day_1/src/main.rs */
// ..

#[derive(Default)]
struct Elf {
    calories: Vec<u32>,
}

// REMOVED: impl Default for Elf {}
// ..
```

Running `Elf::default()` will now return an `Elf` struct with an empty `calories` vector. Let's update our `new` function to use this trait method.

```rust
/* aoc/day_1/src/main.rs */
// ..

impl Elf {
    fn new() -> Self {
        Default::default()
    }
    // ..
}
// ..
```

We can run `cargo test day_1` again to make sure everything still works. 

> **Why do we define a `new` method when we already derive `Default`?**
>
> The `Default` trait and `new` functions provide subtly different functionality, though they happen to overlap in our code. However, had we required some parameter to be passed in before we could safely instatiate our struct, then we would use the `new` function to do that. 
>
> In general, I have noticed the `new` function used in APIs with private data members, and the `Default` trait utilized in APIs that offer direct access to data members. We will work with APIs that use both patterns in later chapters.

## An expedition

With our `Elf` struct complete, let's work on our `Expedition`. Based on our problem's input, I think it will be helpful to have the following functions: 
- `new`, which creates a new, empty expedition,
- `add_elf`, which accepts a list of Calorie counts, adds them to a new elf's `calories`, then adds that elf to the expedition,
- `max`, which finds the elf holding the most Calories and returns the sum of that elf's Calorie count

> We may need to create some helper functions along the way, especially for the `max` calculation.

Here are the function definitions I used for this problem. See if you can fill out their bodies on your own. I also include the definition of a `Elf::total_calories` method which returns the sum of all Calorie counts held by a particular Elf, which I end up using in my `max` definition. 

As you create implementations for these signatures, keep in mind the test-driven development we used earlier. Have your tests ready before you start writing your implementations, so that you can be sure you know what you're looking for. If you get stuck, I include some hints at the bottom of this page. If you get really stuck, I am including full solutions in the source code for this book.

```rust
/* aoc/day_1/src/main.rs */
#[derive(Default)]              // Because both Vec and Elf implement `Default`,
struct Expedition(Vec<Elf>);    // the compiler may infer an implementation for 
                                // Expedition

impl Expedition {
    fn new() -> Self {...}
    fn add_elf(&mut self, calories: Vec<u32>) {...}
    fn max(&self) -> u32 {...}
}

// ..

impl Elf {
    fn total_calories(&self) -> u32 {...}
}
```
> **Hints**
> 
> Convert a vec into an iterator with: 
> 
> `Vec::iter`, `Vec::iter_mut`, or `Vec::into_iter` [[ref](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/vec/struct.Vec.html#method.iter)]
>
> Find the sum of an iterator over integers with `Iter::sum::<T>`.``
> ```rust
> let v: Vec<u32> = vec![1, 2, 3];
> assert_eq!(v.iter().sum::<u32>(), 6)
> ```
>
> Find the max of an iterator over integers with `Iter::max` (Returns `Option<&T>`)
> ```rust
> let v: Vec<u32> = vec![1, 2, 3];
> assert_eq!(v.iter().max().unwrap(), &3);
> ```