# File Parsing and IO 

Almost all of the challenges in this book offer some text-based input, where each line is a new data point that needs to be parsed. In this chapter, we will accomplish two major tasks:
1) Define a function to iterate over the lines of a text document (our input)
2) Create a parser that can load each line of our model

The following function takes in the path to a local file and returns an iterator over each line as `Option<String>`. Eventually, we'll move this function to a shared library for reuse. For now, let's just drop this function at the top of `main.rs`.

```rust
// aoc/day_1/src/main.rs
use std::{
    fs::File,
    io::{BufRead, BufReader, Lines},
    path::PathBuf,
};

fn read_as_lines<T: ToString>(path: T) -> Lines<BufReader<File>> {
    let file = File::open(PathBuf::from(path.to_string()))
        .expect("Cannot open file");

    BufReader::new(file).lines()
}
```

Our parameter, `path`, can be any object that implements the `ToString` trait. In our case, that will be a `String` or `&str` literal of the path to our input file. For example, the path to today's challenge will be something like `"inputs/day_1.txt"`.

The `PathBuf::from(...)` function converts the provided string literal into a OS path. Using this function lets us use forward slashes for all of our paths, even on Windows. `File::open(...)` returns `Option<File>`, where `File` is a `Read`able handle to a local file.

`BufReader::new` wraps our File handle in a buffered reader. This reader will preload the file into memory before individual `Read` calls are made. I ripped this pattern straight out of [Rust By Example](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/std_misc/file/read_lines.html), and it's the idiomatic way to read a file. The `lines` method returns an iterator over the lines of the file, where each item is `Option<String>`.

The result is that we can quickly read in our input. Let's create a folder to store our input files. 
```bash
# aoc/
$ mkdir inputs
$ touch inputs/day_1.txt
```

Copy the challenge input into the newly created `inputs/day_1_input.txt`.

## Input parsing

Perhaps the most difficult part of the first few Advent of Code (AoC) challenges, at least for me, is parsing or deserializing the input. Since this challenge isn't unique to Rust, I won't include a full solution here (see the source code for that), but here is the signature for the function I used:

```rust
// aoc/day_1/src/main.rs
// ..
fn expedition_builder(lines: Lines<BufReader<File>>) -> Expedition {...}
// ..
```

The body of this function needs to do the following. See **HINTS** at the bottom of this page for additional guidance.
- Create a new `Expedition`
- Loop through `lines`
- At the start of the loop, create a new `Elf`
- Cast each line to an integer and add it to the `Elf`
- When an empty line is found, push the `Elf` onto the `Expedition` and create a new `Elf`
- Return the now full `Expedition`

## I would like to solve the puzzle

Once we have a functional `expedition_builder`, solving this problem becomes trivial.
```rust
// aoc/day_1/src/main.rs
// ..
fn main() {
    // Input file path is relative to package directory: aoc/day_1
    let lines = read_as_lines("../inputs/day_1.txt");
    let expedition = expedition_builder(lines);
    let max_cal = expedition.max();
    println!("{}", max_cal);
}
// ..
```

Congratulations! You completed your first challenge and got a pretty gold star â­. 

You're ready to tackle part 2 of today's challenge. This part doesn't introduce any new concepts relative to our study of Rust, so I will let you try to solve it on your own. As always, you can check the hints below and this book's source code for help.

> **HINTS**
> > You can turn a string or string literal into an integer using the function `String::parse::<T>`. 
> > ```rust
> > let s = "1000";         // String literal &str
> > let n = s.parse::<u32>().unwrap();
> > assert_eq!(n, 1000);     // n is now u32
> > ```
>
> > You can _collect_ an iterator into a vector using `Iter::collect::<T>`. This lets you use vector methods like `Vec::sort` or `Vec::reverse()`.
> > ```rust
> > let vector = vec![1,2,3];
> > let iterator = vec![1,2,3].into_iter();
> > let new_vector = iterator.collect::<Vec<_>>();
> > assert_eq!(vector, new_vector);
> > 
> > ```

